## Eng Recruiting Thoughts
Hi all, my name is Justin Hill. I am writing a few recruiting thoughts that would be helpful to everyone, especially people with a Software Engineering focus. Broadly, I would scope the recruiting search for any full-time job/ internship into Building Experience -> Marketing Yourself -> Getting Interviews -> Passing Interviews.

## Building Experience
When I decided to switch my major to Computer Science halfway through my Sophomore year, I had 0 experience in anything related to Software Engineering. The most important part about getting experience is just to do it. It doesn’t matter what it is or how sexy it is. This is your opportunity to show some grit. If you don’t have the skills, get them. If you need more experience, get it. Software Engineering is an industry where you will be expected to learn independently. Recruiters will seeing demonstrations of your willingness to learn independently. Take a class on [Udemy][1] or [Treehouse][2]. Take Harvard’s [CS50][3]. Become [AWS certified][4]. Get the certificates for these classes and then add them to your LinkedIn.
Additionally, getting a CS-related job is easier than we sometimes make it out to be. There are tons of CS Professors looking for TAs and Research Assistants. You often don’t need to be qualified for these positions, and you can get school credit for doing it. You can get paid to [teach][5] Computer Science. Additionally, there are a ton of startups in the surrounding area. Many of these companies are looking for cheap engineers to help them ship features. You can email engineering leads at [these companies][6] and let them know you are looking for an internship while you are in school. Even though you might not have many skills, you can show that you are hungry to learn what you need to be an influential contributor.
Although school is important and grades are necessary (especially for grad school, should you be so inclined), I would always try to have an outside job where you get experience for 10 to 15 hours a week. A lot of what we learn as CS students in university can be theoretical, so balancing that knowledge with practical know-how can benefit you as an applicant.


## Marketing Yourself
As a CS student, most applications will likely ask for your personal website, a resume, a GitHub, and a LinkedIn page.
For a resume, it should be pretty close to flawless. Recruiters will spend maybe 10 seconds looking at each one, so ensure the wording is correct and visually appealing. But, again, the [Marriott School format][7] should suffice:
There are plenty of resources for having a good LinkedIn presence. I think the most important part here is that you have one that lists some of your experiences (school, mission, etc.) and that it maybe has a couple of links to your GitHub or personal website.
Since you are a CS student, you need a personal website. What is on it isn’t essential, but you must have one. You could bootstrap one pretty quickly over a weekend.
Make sure you have a GitHub, and make sure you have some personal projects on it. Again it doesn’t matter what the projects are, but generally, people with an active GitHub presence are also people who are curious, passionate, and deep learners. You should be spending some time outside of school and work committing personal projects to your GitHub for fun. If that doesn’t sound very fun to you, you may be better off pursuing a different career; I hate to say it. For starters, a computer science degree has excellent exit points into Venture Capital, Consulting, and Investment Banking. You don’t need to be an engineer, but I hope you enjoy building things if you want to be an engineer. An active GitHub is one of the ways you show that.


## Getting Interviews
There are two strategies to follow here, and I suggest that they be followed concurrently until you land an internship or job at a “big name” company. First, automatic resume filtering software is a pain to fight against, making getting an interview as an engineer with little experience kind of a crapshoot. 

1. Best Way - Try and think of a few target companies that you want to apply to. Since BYU is such a huge school, it is likely that at least a few people work at those companies on your list. You can search those companies on LinkedIn and then run a filtered search on people who work in your network or went to your school. Then you can send connection requests to those individuals and add a message like, “Hey, I am currently a student at {university} and saw that you went here too. I am interested in learning more about {x} company since I want to work there. Would it be possible for us to find a time to talk about your experiences there?” You’d be surprised at the number of responses this will generate and the people willing to take the time to talk to you. Often, these same individuals might help refer you for roles at those companies. A caveat here is sometimes there are restrictions on who you are allowed to direct at a company you work for (i.e., you need to have worked together before). So if they say that they can’t refer you, be understanding and thank them for their time.
2. Brute Force - Create an excel spreadsheet to track applications and apply for every job opportunity you see and are interested in. Use LinkedIn, Handshake, Career Fairs, and friends to source these opportunities. Again, you’ll be surprised at the responses from these companies. Sometimes you might unexpectedly get an interview with a high-profile company and then get rejected by a “less prestigious” tech company. But that’s why we are brute forcing it. I would apply to at least 100 opportunities that you see. Since applications can get a bit monotonous, you can apply to these companies during less engaging lectures you are attending or while you are watching a show on Netflix. 


## Passing Interviews
My first advice for anyone interviewing for a Software Engineering role is to build a framework that you take with you to approach any problem. A framework is a paradigm or set of lenses that you use to view a situation. This skill is vital for any engineer and directly transferrable to any industry.

One of the essential things to remember about interviewing is to understand that you are not just being graded on your coding ability. At Facebook, for example, they grade you on four distinct categories: coding ability, communication, problem-solving, and verification. No matter who you are, you likely won’t impact a business's bottom line as an intern or new grad. Therefore, companies generally are looking for intelligent individuals that can quickly pick up skills and solve necessary problems. Even if you lack coding ability, you can make up for that by demonstrating strong communication and the ability to think through problems. Those skills and running your test cases can set you apart as a candidate in a pool of applicants that think they are just being graded on coding ability.

You must build your framework to approach any problem. For example, my framework was the following: 

1. Understand question input and output - This is critical. Read through the question and articulate the question back to the interviewer. The worst thing you can do in an interview is solving the wrong problem. Our initial impression of a question isn’t what it is asking. Spend time studying the question.
2. Solve by Hand - Many software engineers forget that many of the problems we solve are easier to think about if we abstract them from the means of implementation. A problem’s solution becomes self-evident if we think about how we would solve it in real life, even if we don’t know how to write code. This is broadly a process of pseudocode. Consider the following situation.
3. Figure out the technical solution - We still haven’t started coding yet. This step can be skipped if part two leads to a self-evident answer of how to implement the solution in code. If it didn’t, though, I think now would be a great time to start listing data structures that might be helpful for our solution.
4. High-Level Walkthrough of the solution - Communication is essential to a software engineering interview. The engineer is not only looking to grade your communication ability; they are also looking to grade your communication ability. Can you explain things simply? Are you someone that they would like to work with on a group project? Before implementation, I would take some time to verbally discuss your solution verbally with the interviewer. You don’t have to ask for hints, but you can subtly ask them, “what do you think”? Most interviewees do not do this, which will likely catch them off guard. Once you have run through the solution with them, it is time to implement it in code.
5. Code it out - If you are following this framework, you should have an excellent idea of what you will implement in code. I’ve noticed that the better a software engineer is, the less time they spend on “programming.” 
6. Take sample input through code - most problems you are given will come with some sort of sample input/output. If you weren’t given sample input and output, I would ask your interviewer to provide some. Once you have a solution written out, I would take the sample input through your solution line by line. The critical part here is that you are taking the sample input through your written solution, not what you think your answer is in your mind. Sometimes you will find that what you wrote isn’t necessarily what you thought you wrote out or implemented. Doing this step alone can often help you find 90% of bugs in your code.
7. Do your test cases - This would be an excellent time to think of some personal test cases through which you could run your code. I believe that this section could especially be beneficial for you if you can think of some edge cases that most candidates won’t think of. For example, how does your code respond when a user puts in entirely unexpected input… negative numbers, zeros, etc.
8. Space and Time complexity - This likely won’t come up in a job setting, but this is a proper theoretical exercise for companies to gauge that you are intentional about implementing solutions to problems. They want to see you think about these concepts as you tackle problems.
9. Optimize (if possible and time permits) - Hopefully, you won’t have to code anything out for this part. However, I would make sure that you at least reference some possible ways that you might be able to optimize your solution to solve the problem.

I didn’t come up with this framework myself. I came up with it after failing multiple interviews and studying for hours on LeetCode and AlgoExpert. 

From my perspective, [AlgoExpert][8] is the best resource that you can use to prep for interviews. It is well-formatted, has great UX, and is comprehensive. It has videos and discussion boards and offers mock interviews where you get to interview someone else, and they will interview you. The best way to get experience in interviews is to do them. I would try and do one mock interview per week where you have a real person interview you. It will give you some experience discussing technical problems and thinking out loud. [Pramp][9] is another excellent resource for this.

If you are at BYU, you should also take CS393. It is a class that lets you get credit for preparing for interviews. Probably one of my favorite classes at BYU. Dr. Farrell is great, and the class is directly applicable to helping you get better at interviewing for jobs.

I’m no interview expert or competitive programming champion, but I’ll offer my own plan of tackling interview prep. I was super stoked to interview my sophomore year (after I switched my major) and immediately started applying for every job I found. I was quickly humbled by several technical challenges sent my way, including being downright embarrassed by the Amazon one where I rage quit after being so frustrated by it. In my defense, I had never taken data structures seriously. Luckily, I decided to get serious instead of giving up, so starting the summer after my sophomore year I:
1. Took the AlgoExpert data structures and algorithms [online course][10].
2. Started solving one new AlgoExpert question per day.
3. Created a spaced repetition deck of flashcards that forced me to continually solve these problems day after day until I became extremely confident. I used [Anki][11] to create this deck, with a format of the following:
I would have the prompt on the front of the card that contained the technical question, and on the back, I would have a screenshot of the solution. Day after day, I would rent a room in the library or engineering building and go through the entire deck and solve each one on the whiteboard. I would act like I was actually in an interview and explain all of my thinking to a rubber duck. By the time I was interviewing that Fall, I had solved around 120 questions on AlgoExpert (I got a certificate for this somehow), but most importantly, I could basically solve all 120 questions at will. I think a lot of people go for quantity over quality when it comes to technical interviews, but to paraphrase Bruce Lee I fear not the man that has solved 1000 questions on Leetcode once, but I do fear the man that has solved 100 questions on LeetCode 10 times. That sort of mastery leads you to be able to basically at will combine parts of different questions into a new solution. Once you really commit to technical interviews, you will realize that there are really only like 10 types of questions. Once you can recognize that, every question, no matter how difficult, just becomes a combination of easier smaller questions that you know how to solve. This isn’t route memorization. Rather it is helping you learn how to think through technical interview questions from first principles, a valuable skill indeed. I don’t think this approach is without flaws but I can confidently say that if you follow it verbatim for a bit, within 3-4 months you will not be scared of technical interviews anymore.

[1]: https://www.udemy.com/ "Udemy"
[2]: https://teamtreehouse.com/ "Treehouse"
[3]: https://pll.harvard.edu/course/cs50-introduction-computer-science?delta=0 "CS50"
[4]: https://acloudguru.com/ "Cloud Guru"
[5]: https://web.fountain.com/c/juni-learning "Juni Learning"
[6]: https://devmountain.com/blog/coolest-tech-companies-work-utah/ "Cool Places to Work in Utah"
[7]: https://marriott.byu.edu/advisement/wp-content/uploads/sites/12/2015/07/MSM-Resume-Template.pdf "Resume Format"
[8]: https://www.algoexpert.io/product "AlgoExpert"
[9]: https://www.pramp.com/#/ "Pramp"
[10]: https://www.algoexpert.io/data-structures "AlgoExpert"
[11]: [https://teamtreehouse.com/](https://apps.ankiweb.net/) "Anki"
